[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
sally nugent and dan walker our
headlines today
exactly one year on from the first
coronavirus lockdown prince charles asks
the nation to come together
in a day of reflection let us take a
moment together to remember those
who have been lost to give thanks
for their lives five thousand pound
fines could be issued to anyone heading
abroad on holiday under new coronavirus
laws due to come into force in england
next week
another test for nicola sturgeon a
report by msps will accuse the first
minister of misleading their
investigation
when it's published in the next few
hours
a police officer is among 10 people
killed in a mass shooting at a grocery
store in the u.s state of colorado
good morning what was the year of
lockdown done to jobs numbers in the
next hour will tell us how restrictions
over the bleak mid-winter affected
employment but the furlough scheme is
still masking what's next
good morning in sport after losing the
test and t20 series canon morgan's side
produce a winning finish
in india england's first one day
international gets underway in a couple
of hours
the bbc journalist clive myery takes
over from john humphries
as the new host of mastermind we will
put him through his paces
just before nine o'clock this morning
good morning it's a cloudier breezier
day ahead today with a little bit of
rain in the north and the west
i'll be here with all your weather
details throughout the morning
[Music]
good morning it is tuesday the 23rd of
march our top story
the prince of wales has called for the
uk to take a moment today to remember
those we have lost to covid
on what is being called a national day
of reflection it comes exactly a year to
the day since the first lockdown began
marking the start of the biggest
and longest national crisis since the
second world war
our political correspondent chris mason
has been looking back
from this evening i must give the
british people a very simple
instruction you must stay at home
but present there are just no easy
options
the way ahead is hard and it is still
true
that many lives will sadly
be lost a year ago today fewer than 1
000 people in the uk
had died with coronavirus the figure now
stands at more than 126 thousand
if you would have imagined the scale of
the loss of lives and liberties
the restrictions we'd still be facing 12
months on
this morning on what's been called a
national day of reflection
the prime minister says the last 12
months have taken a huge
toll on us all and i offer my sincere
condolences
to those who have lost loved ones today
the anniversary of the first lockdown
is an opportunity to reflect on the past
year
one of the most difficult in our
country's history
he's not the only one who's thinking
back
over the year just gone over the past
year our country has been through a
trial
which has tested our resolve and our
resilience
in countless ways we've all been
inspired
by the resourcefulness we have witnessed
humbled
by the dedication shown by so many
and moved beyond words by the sacrifices
we've seen
the challenge of course is far from over
the scramble for vaccines the colossal
economic damage done
the new wave of cases confronting many
of our nearest neighbours
the impact of which will wash upon our
shores
as the prime minister put it this
morning more than 50 mps and peers
along with the health unions the british
medical association and the royal
college of nursing
are suggesting that this day every year
should be known as
covid memorial day and a monument should
be put
up here on whitehall chris mason bbc
news
at westminster i'll be reflecting on
that throughout the morning for you and
now anyone caught leaving the uk
from england without a reasonable excuse
could be fined 5 000 pounds from next
week this is part of a new
covered law which comes into force uh
from monday the 29th of march let's
speak to keith doyle
who joins us this morning from heathrow
keith good morning to you so what do we
know exactly about this legislation so
far
yeah good morning from heathrow there's
a relatively few flights leaving here
this morning but uh shortly there will
be ones leaving for paris amsterdam
new york and chicago but as you say from
march to 29th next monday
it will be illegal under english law to
leave the uk without a valid reason to
do that you can get a fine
of five thousand pounds there'll also be
a 200 pound fine for people who don't
fill out those
passenger uh declaration forms now it's
already illegal to go on holiday
what this is doing is making it an
explicit offense
to leave the uk without a valid reason
so tightening
the laws before what would normally be
the busy holiday season
now it this only applies this doesn't
apply to the common travel area so
that's
the isle of man channel islands and the
republic of ireland uh what that will do
though is close that's uh loophole where
people using dublin to
travel further so you can't use them as
a stepping stone to go further there are
exemptions
so you can travel for work for study to
move house for various
health family and safety reasons now the
newspapers this morning are screaming
headlines saying that there's no summer
holidays
until the end of june well that's
technically right this law is in place
till the 30th of june but it will be
reviewed
on the 12th of april and every 35 days
after that so that's in line with the
the government's roadmap uh out of
covert restrictions
so it could be lifted earlier but what
this is doing is getting the government
is getting everything in place so it can
slam the brakes on any uh possible uh
early summer getaway if it feels it's
necessary
okay keith thank you very much and we'll
be speaking to the health secretary
about hancock uh about that and a number
of other things at 7 30 this morning
now a gunman has killed 10 people in a
supermarket in the u.s state of colorado
the victims include a police officer who
attended the shooting in the city of
boulder david willis has more
early afternoon in a residential area of
boulder colorado
police are called to a local grocery
store where a man
with a rifle had opened fire
as people were led to safety chilling
video emerged of victims lying wounded
both inside and
outside the store among the dead was
local police officer eric talley
an 11-year veteran of the boulder police
force
officer talley responded to the scene
was the first on the scene
and he was fatally shot i also want to
commend
the heroic actions of the officers
responding not only from boulder pd
but from across the county and other
parts
of this region
police officers actions felt nothing
short of being heroic
pictures from the scene showed a
middle-aged man shirtless and dressed in
shorts
being led away from the grocery store in
handcuffs
officials won't confirm he was the
gunman nor will they comment
on a possible motive so they're pulling
onto broadway here
as swat team officers converged on the
scene the white house said president
biden had been briefed on the incident
last month on the third anniversary of a
mass shooting in florida
in which 17 people died he called for
background checks
on anyone seeking to buy a gun and a ban
on assault weapons
but this is the second mass shooting in
this country in the space of a week
and it has already prompted calls for a
new national conversation
about gun violence but the right to own
a gun is enshrined in the constitution
here
and those seeking a change in the law
have had their attempts thwarted
many times before david willis bbc news
los angeles
scotland's first minister nicolas
sturgeon is facing further pressure
about her handling of
harassment allegations against her
predecessor alex salmond
yesterday an independent inquiry cleared
her of breaching ministerial code
a separate report by a cross-party
committee of msps
which is published this morning will
accuse ms sturgeon of misleading its
investigation
nick earley reports solemnly sincerely
and
truly for some time nicholas sturgeon
had faced claims
she hadn't been completely honest her
critics
including her former mentor alex salmond
claimed she hadn't followed the rules
ministers have to follow
the ministerial code but last night
the man tasked with investigating that
the independent adviser on the code
concluded she hadn't broken the rules in
four key areas
i have been very clear in my own mind
that i acted appropriately and did not
reach the ministerial code but
that while that might be necessary is
not sufficient it's important to the
scottish people that they have
independent
verification and adjudication of that
and that of course is what they now have
first i have no difficulty the ruling is
a big boost for nicola sturgeon
just before the scottish election
campaign gets underway
but she'll face some criticism in a
report to be published
this morning from a committee of msps
they say
she misled them in her evidence and have
questioned
parts of her account the hamilton
inquiry
hasn't looked at a number of key areas
further potential breaches of the
ministerial code scottish conservatives
believe
nicolas sturgeon has reached the
ministerial court she has not been
truthful
with parliament or the people of
scotland and she cannot continue as
first minister
nicola sturgeon will stay in her job for
now the next big decision
will be for voters in scotland who go to
the polls
in six weeks time nick hardly abc news
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news